Facts About Fish

Catfish are known to have up to 175,000 taste buds, far more than the human average of 10,000.
Most species of fish use their eyes to spot food. Some fish are able to see microscopic food like Plankton.
The location of fish's eyes are at the top of their head. It results in there being a tendency to eat prey that is above
the fish.
Fish are unable to see anything directly behind themselves or anything below their head.
While there are some species of fish that are able to see at night, there are also other species that can barely see in
darkness.
Some species of fish have an extreme sense of smell.
Fish typically use their sense of smell to find food, but they use their taste buds to determine if they want to eat the
object in their mouth or spit it out.
A fish's taste buds are not always located in a fish's mouth. For example, a catfish has 175,000 taste buds spread all
over its body, with another 20,000 inside its mouth.
Most species of freshwater fish in North America reproduce at least one time a year.
When fish reproduce, they normally produce tens of thousands of eggs, but only a very small percentage make it to
adulthood (for example 1 in 10,000).
Most fish cannot swim backward.
Catfish can taste and smell with their skin.
There are around 32,000 species of fish.
Some species of fish don't just spend time in water, some can "fly" short distances.
97% of all known fish reproduce by laying eggs.

fishing gears
There are three general types of surrounding nets: lampara nets, purse seines, and ring nets. 
1.	 Lampara nets have tapered panels, created by a shorter leadline, giving the net a spoon 
shape when the ends are drawn together. As the vessel tows the lampara net forward, the 
bottom and top of the net close and the fish are retained in a collection area called the 
central bunt. Lampara nets originated in Italy and were brought to California in 1905 by 
Italian Pacific Sardine (See California Fisheries) fishermen. Lampara nets are used in 
coastal and inland waters primarily by countries around the Mediterranean Sea as well 
as the United States, South Africa, Argentina, and Japan. 
A profile view (left) of a lampara net illustra
 and a birds-eye view (right) of a lampara net
 characteristic spoon shape. (Credit: Food a
 TheAustralian Marine Conservation Societ
 A profile view (left) of a lampara net illustrat 
and a birds-eye view (right) of a lampara net 
characteristic spoon shape. (Credit: Food and 
The Australian Marine Conservation Society) 
ing the tapered panels created by a longer floatline
 depicting a open and closed lampara net with its
 Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and
 ting the tapered panels created by a longer floatline
 depicting a open and closed lampara net with its 
nd Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and 
y) 
2.	 Purse seines use floats to buoy the floatline at the surface and weights to sink the 
leadline, which is of equal or greater length than the floatline. A purse line made of rope 
or wire, threads through a series of rings along the bottom of the net, known as purse 
rings. Once the targeted fish have been surrounded the purse line is pulled tight, causing 
the bottom of the net to close similar to a drawstring purse. Purse seining (animation) 
occurs in both coastal and high seas environments throughout the world. The purse seine 
was developed in the U.S. for use in the Menhaden fishery on the east coast after the 
Civil War. 

Fishery Basics – Fishing Gear 
A profile view (left) illustrating the setti
 an open and closed purse seine. (Credit: F
 Nations and The Australian Marine Conse
 A profile view (left) illustrating the setting of a 
an open and closed purse seine. (Credit: Food a 
Nations and The Australian Marine Conserva 
ng of a purse seine and a birds-eye view (right) depicting 
ood and Agriculture Organization of the United 
rvation Society) 
 purse seine and a birds-eye view (right) depicting
 nd Agriculture Organization of the United 
tion Society)
 3.	 Ring nets are a cross between lampara nets and purse seines. Similar to lampara nets, 
ring nets have tapered panels due to a shorter leadline and central bunt. However, ring 
nets also have rings and a purse line along the bottom of the net, thus allowing the net to 
be closed without having to drag it behind the vessel. Ring nets are used in waters all 
over the world. 

Methods
The five basic methods of angling are bait fishing, fly-fishing, bait casting, spinning, and trolling. All are used in both freshwater and saltwater angling.

Bait fishing, also called still fishing or bottom fishing, is certainly the oldest and most universally used method. In British freshwater fishing it is used to catch what are called coarse (or rough) fish. These include bream, barb, tench, dace, and other nongame species. A bait is impaled on the hook, which is “set” by the angler raising the tip of the rod when the fish swallows it. Common baits in fishing include worms, maggots, small fish, bread paste, cheese, and small pieces of vegetables and grain. The bait may be weighted down with what is called a ledger in Britain and a sinker in the United States, usually of lead. In this type of fishing, the angler simply holds the rod or lays it down and waits for the telltale tug of the fish to be transmitted through the line. Bait may also be fished by suspending it at a chosen depth under a buoyant object attached to the line that is made of cork or plastic, called a float in Britain and a bobber in the United States. The angler attempts to suspend the bait at a depth where foraging fish will notice it and in locations near the natural hiding places of fish—such as sunken weed beds, logs, and underwater rock formations.

The rods used in still fishing both in North America and Britain are usually 6 to 9 feet (1.8 to 2.7 metres) long, with a fixed-spool reel and monofilament line of 2- to 25-pound (900- to 11,300-gram) test strength. In North America, still fishing is usually practiced with conventional bait-casting or spinning tackle. Freshwater fish taken by this method include bluegills, crappies, perch, carp, and catfish, as well as bass and walleyes. The most common natural North American baits are worms, minnows, crayfish, cut-up fish, leeches, and grubs or maggots.

Another type of bait fishing, most commonly done in rivers and streams, involves drifting a baited hook into deep pools and beneath in-stream cover (such as logs and rocks) to entice game fish that station themselves in those locations for feeding. Conventional spinning gear is the tackle of choice for this style of fishing.

Ice fishing, through holes cut in frozen lakes, is particularly popular in the northeastern United States and the Great Lakes–St. Lawrence valley region of the United States and Canada. Equipment is commonly a three-foot rod with a simple reel or a cleatlike device to hold nonfreezing monofilament line and a tilt, or tip-up, to signal when the fish has taken the bait. Fish taken through the ice vary from panfish (crappies, bluegills, and perch) to larger game fish (pike, walleye, bass, and lake trout). Ice fishing became increasingly popular in the 20th century in Scandinavian and other European countries where heavy freezing permits it.

Examples of two types of fishing reels: bait casting (left) and fly.
Examples of two types of fishing reels: bait casting (left) and fly.
Fly-fishing lures.
Fly-fishing lures.
Fly-fishing is a method of angling employing a rod 7 to 11 feet (2.1 to 3.4 metres) in length, a simple arbor reel, and a heavy plastic-coated line joined to a lighter nylon leader. The rod is used to cast artificial flies—made of hair, feathers, or synthetic materials and designed to imitate the natural food sources of the fish. The fly-fisher snaps the long rod back and forth, allowing the heavier weight of the line to propel the nearly weightless fly forward. The fly needs to land as gently as possible upon the water to avoid startling the fish. A simple reel is used only to contain the line and to help in tiring a hooked fish. Species fished include trout and salmon, but by the end of the 20th century virtually all game fish, from panfish to muskellunge, were fished with flies.

Bait casting and spin casting differ essentially in the type of reel, the rod length, and the strength of the line used. Bait casting usually employs a reel with heavier line, often in the 10- to 20-pound (4,500- to 9,000-gram) test range. Most spinning reels are usually spooled with lighter lines in the 6- to 10-pound (2,700- to 4,500-gram) test class. Spinning rods are generally 6–10 feet (1.8–3.0 metres) long, while the usual length of a bait-casting rod is 5–6 feet (1.5–1.8 metres). Bait casting originally used live minnows but grew to use artificial lures—pieces of metal or painted plastic designed to imitate a fish’s natural prey—as well as metal spoons and spinners. The lures are cast in likely fish-rich areas and are retrieved in a manner that allows them to effect a swimming action in the water. Lures vary in weight from 1/16 to 1 ounce (1.8 to 28 grams) or more. Spinning tackle is usually used with lighter lures, and bait-casting tackle is used with heavier lures.

Examples of two types of fishing reels: spinning (left) and trolling.
Examples of two types of fishing reels: spinning (left) and trolling.
Trolling involves the use of live bait or artificial lures that are drawn through the water behind a slow-moving boat, originally rowed but now generally motor-powered. Trolling is usually done inland on lakes and reservoirs, but it is also the primary method for big-game fishing in the oceans. The method has the advantage of covering a large amount of territory where fish might otherwise be difficult to locate. The correct depth and speed of the lure are crucial in the method. The introduction of sonar equipment in the second half of the 20th century greatly increased the effectiveness of trolling. Rods are usually 5–7 feet (1.5–2.1 metres) long, and lines are heavy, occasionally of metal, with added weights used to get the lure to greater depths. In inland trolling, the rod is held at a right angle to the motion of the boat to take advantage of the rod’s resilience when a fish strikes. Lures are much like those used in bait casting. Salmon, large trout, walleye, and pike are the main species fished.

Saltwater fishing
bluefish
bluefish
Bluefish (Pomatomus saltatrix).
In saltwater fishing, all the methods mentioned previously are used. Fly-fishing in salt water became very popular during the last quarter of the 20th century. Saltwater fishing is done from a beach, off rocks, from a pier, or from a boat, which may vary in size from a rowboat in inland waters to oceangoing craft of considerable size. Fish usually caught from shore include striped bass, bluefish, tarpon, bonefish, and permit. Saltwater anglers fishing from boats take grouper, flounder, snapper, mackerel and many other species by trolling or bottom fishing.

Big-game fishing
Experience game fishing off the coast of Rarotonga, Cook Islands
Experience game fishing off the coast of Rarotonga, Cook Islands
Game fishing for tuna, wahoo, and mahimahi in the waters off the coast of Rarotonga, Cook Islands.
See all videos for this article
Made possible by the motorized boat, saltwater big-game fishing was pioneered in 1898 by Charles Frederick Holder, who took a 183-pound (83-kg) bluefin tuna off Santa Catalina Island, California. Fish usually caught by big-game anglers include tuna, marlin, swordfish, and shark. Big-game fishing spread to the Atlantic, and catches of increasing size were made on relatively light tackle and line, especially after the invention of a reel with an internal drag by Julius von Hofe of Brooklyn, New York, in 1913. Big-game anglers fish from “fighting seats” into which they can be strapped. Rods are massive, and the butts fit into a socket mounted on the chair. Reels are large, and the line is usually of Dacron or nylon with a wire leader near the hook to prevent the large teeth of the fish from shearing the line.

The establishment of the International Game Fish Association (IGFA) in 1939 did much to promote big-game fishing and to regulate it—supervising marine fishing competitions, establishing various weight categories for lines, and keeping championship records. The IGFA also promoted scientific study by encouraging the tagging of released fish to establish fish habitat patterns and by working for conservation of endangered species. In 1978 the association also took over the keeping of freshwater fishing records.

Competitive casting is an adjunct sport, much as shooting is for hunting, under the supervision of the International Casting Sport Federation (founded 1955), with member groups in about 30 countries in the late 20th century. It sponsors tournaments and recognizes world records for accuracy and distance. Competitions are held with both bait-casting and fly tackle.

Recent trends in fishing
At the turn of the 21st century, sport fishing was thriving. It was estimated that about 40 million Americans spent at least one day per year fishing, and their combined expenditures on tackle, travel, and lodging pumped approximately $45 billion annually into the U.S. economy. Because of less public angling access in Great Britain and continental Europe, there are fewer anglers, but large numbers of people there do fish. The greater availability of air travel has increased anglers’ access to many areas of the world and introduced them to new sport fish, such as the dorado of South America, the tigerfish of Africa, and the inconnu of northern North America and Asia. Hardly a species of any importance does not have its angling devotees somewhere. Even the carp, long considered a “trash fish” in North America, has a considerable following. The traditionally popular species remain so, particularly salmon and trout and, in North America, the largemouth bass—the most popular game fish in the United States, so popular that boats for bass fishing are specially designed, and there are numerous tours of professional associations of bass anglers that often have their competitions broadcast on cable television.

A strong emphasis on fisheries conservation and the wise management of fish stocks by both anglers and professional fisheries managers aim to ensure that recreational fishing will continue to thrive for many years to come. For example, catch-and-release angling became increasingly popular since the late 20th century. In many areas of the United States and Canada, individual lakes and streams are increasingly managed for lower catch limits and for habitat quality. Owing to angler demand, fisheries management emphasis continues to shift from management by stocking or replenishing lakes and streams to enhancing existing water quality and habitat so that species found in a body of water can better thrive through natural recruitment and reproduction.

1.1. Carps 
 
Carps form the mainstay of aquaculture practices in India, contributing over 85% of the total 
aquaculture production. Out of 266 carp species available in the Indian region, about 34 
carp species are economical and are produced mainly from capture fishery, while less than 
10 carp species are produced from both the culture and capture fisheries in the country. 
India is called the “Carp Country” since carps have been cultured since ancient times and 
been a relished delicacy in the country. 
The carps which are native to the Indus-Ganges River Systems/ Indo-Gangetic Plains of India 
are referred to as the Gangetic Carps / Indian Major Carps (IMC), comprising of Catla, Rohu 
and Mrigal that contribute 60% of total Carps production. The carps that were introduced 
from other countries are referred to as Exotic Carps such as Silver Carp, Grass Carp and 
Common Carp. 
 
Besides the Major Carps, there are also smaller carps often referred to as Minor Carps such 
as Reba (Cirrhinus reba), Bata (Labeo bata), Fringe-lipped carp (Labeo fimbriatus), Calbasu 
(Labeo calbasu), white carp (Cirrhinus cirrhosus) and Cauvery carp (Labeo kontius). 
 
Fish Name Picture 
Indian Major Carps 
Catla 
Catla catla 
 
Rohu 
Labeo rohita 
 
Mrigal 
Cirrhinus mrigala 
 
Minor Carps 
Reba 
Cirrhinus reba 
 
Bata 
Labeo bata 
 
 
Fringe-lipped Carp 
Labeo fimbriatus 
 
Calbasu 
Labeo calbasu 
 
Pengba 
Osteobrama belangeri 
 
Exotic Carps 
Common Carp 
Cyprinus carpio 
 
Amur Common Carp 
Cyprinus carpio  
 
Grass Carp 
Ctenopharyngodon idella 
 
Silver Carp 
Hypophthalmichthys molitrix 


1.2. Catfish 
Catfishes are a diverse group of ray-finned fish named for their prominent barbels, which 
resemble a cat's whiskers (but not all catfish have prominent barbell). Although catfish can 
generally be found in faster-flowing rivers and streams, some catfish species have adapted 
to living in shallow salt-water environments while other catfish species live their lives in 
caves underground. Most catfish are bottom feeders as they are negatively buoyant (which 
means that they usually sink rather than float due to a reduced gas bladder and a heavy, 
bony head). The air-breathing catfishes such as Magur and Singhi inhabit shallow waters, 
withstand low oxygen conditions and are referred to as "live fishes”; they are marketed live 
and fetch higher price. 
 
Fish Name Picture 
Magur/ Walking Catfish 
Clarias magur  
 
[formerly known as  
C. batrachus] 
 
Singhi/ Stinging Catfish 
Heteropneustes fossilis 
 
Giant River-Catfish,  
Sperata seenghala 
 
[formerly Mystus seenghala / 
Aorichthys seenghala] 
 
Freshwater Shark 
Wallago attu 
 
Pabda Catfish 
Ompok pabda 
 
Sutchi/ Striped Catfish (Exotic) 
Pangasianodon hypophthalmus 
 
1.3. Featherbacks 
Featherbacks are adapted to flowing conditions and widely distributed in deep and clear 
waters in the rivers, beels, reservoirs and ponds. The Bronze Featherback is reported to 
enter brackishwater. They are carnivorous and predatory fish and feed on aquatic insects, 
mollusks, shrimps and small fishes and take insects and tender roots of aquatic plants during 
early stages of life. They are rich in nutritive value and commands higher market price 
despite the presence of a large number of intramuscular spines. 
 
Fish Name Picture 
Chital 
Chitala chitala 
 
Bronze Featherback 
Notopterus notopterus 
 
 
1. 4. Small Indigenous Fish Species (SIFS) 
They are defined as fish that grow to a maximum size of 25-30 cm in mature or adult stage 
of their life cycle. They inhabit rivers and tributaries, floodplains, ponds and tanks, lakes, 
beels, streams, lowland areas, wetlands and paddy fields. In India, out of 877 native 
freshwater fish species, about 450 are Small Indigenous Fish Species (SIFS). The maximum 
diversity of SIFS in freshwaters has been recorded from the North East Region followed by 
Western Ghats and Central India. About 62 SIFS have been categorized as food fish while 42 
species as ornamental fish. Some cultivable SIFS are Mola, Climbing Perch, Barbs, Bata, etc. 
 
Small Indigenous Freshwater Fish Species (SIFS) 
Fish Name Picture 
Mola Carplet 
Amblypharyngodon mola 
 
Climbing Perch 
Anabas testudineus 
 
Ticto Barb 
Puntius ticto 
 
Pool Barb 
Puntius sophore 
 
Silver Hatchet Chela 
Chela cachius 
 
 
1.5. Snakeheads 
The snakeheads are members of the freshwater Perciformes fish family Channidae, native to 
parts of Africa and Asia. They inhabit swampy waters and their gills are adapted to breathe 
air. They can survive out of water for up to four days, provided they are wet, and are known 
to migrate up to 400 metres on wet land to other bodies of water by wriggling with their 
body and fins. They have a pair of air-chambers (suprabranchial cavity), developing from the 
pharynx, lined by vascular epithelium, take in air and function like lungs. 
 
Snakeheads consume plankton, aquatic insects, and mollusks during early life stages and 
become predatory and cannibalistic as they grow. The snakehead meat has good taste, high 
nutrient and also has high pharmaceutical values. Snakehead also has all the essential amino 
acids for wound healing, especially glycine, which is important for the formation of human 
skin collagen. 
 
Snakeheads  
Fish Name Picture 
Striped Murrel / Snakehead 
Channa striata 
 
Spotted Murrel / Snakehead 
Channa punctata 
 
Flower Murrel / Bullseye Snakehead 
Channa marulius 
 
Dwarf Murrel / Snakehead 
Channa gachua 
 
 
1.6. Tilapias 
Tilapias are a group of “Cichlid” fish native to the African Continent. In the Central African 
Countries, farming of Tilapias in ponds was introduced after Second World War and then 
soon spread to most of the tropical and sub-tropical countries of the world and hence they 
are referred to as international fish. Although most of the natural resources of Tilapias are 
found mainly in Africa, nearly 80% of the global Aquaculture production of Tilapias of about 
5.0 million metric tonnes comes from Asia. Tilapias are considered the most important 
aquaculture species of the 21st century and they are being cultured in 100 countries of the 
world commercially, ranging from extensive to super-intensive scale. 
 
 
Fish Name Picture 
Nile Tilapia 
Oreochromis niloticus 
 
GIFT Strain 
Oreochromis niloticus 
 
Red Tilapia 
Oreochromis niloticus 
 
Mozambique Tilapia 
Oreochromis mozambicus 
 
 
 
1.7. Coldwater Fishes 
 
Coldwater fishes occupy an important place amongst the freshwater fishes of India. The 
coldwater fisheries deal with fisheries activity in water where temperature of water ranges 
from 5 to 20 degrees centigrade. The gills of cold water fish are greatly reduced and the gill 
opening are smaller in size for adaptation to cold temperatures. Important coldwater fishes 
of India are Mahseers such as Tor putitora, T. tor, T. khudree, T. mosal, Snow Trout such as 
Schizothorax richardsonii and Schizothoraichthys esocinus, Mountain Trout such as Barilius 
vagra, B. bendelisis, other fish such as Glyptothorax sp., Garra sp., etc. 
 
 
Mahseers 
Fish Name Picture 
Golden Mahseer 
Tor putitora 
 
Tor Mahseer 
Tor tor 
 
Deccan Mahseer 
Tor khudree 
 
Chocolate Mahseer 
Neolissocheilus hexagonolepis 
 
Trout 
Common Snow Trout 
Schizothorax richardsonii 
 
Rainbow Trout 
Oncorhynchus mykiss 
 
Brown Trout 
Salmo trutta 
 
Brook Trout  
Salvelinus fontinalis 
 
 
 
Others 
Mountain Trout 
Barilius vagra 
 
Gheur 
Barilius bendelisis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Brackishwater Fisheries 
 
India has around 1.2 million ha brackishwater resources comprising of estuaries (deltaic 
river mouths), coastal lagoons, lakes, backwaters, tidal creeks, canals, mudflats, mangrove 
plants, etc. These water bodies lying between the freshwater and marine regimes have 
certain characteristics: (i) fluctuating water level synchronizing with the tides, (ii) wide 
salinity range of 0-35 ppt, (iii) higher nutrient content and productivity, (iv) serve as nursery 
grounds for numerous marine organisms, (v) harbour a rich diversity of flora and fauna, and 
(vi) support artisanal capture fisheries and provide livelihood to the coastal fishers.      
 
The tidal currents carrying with them the juvenile fish and shrimp, and the rising and falling 
water level formed the basis of traditional brackishwater fish and shrimp farming practices 
in the Bheries of West Bengal and Pokalli paddy fields of Kerala. Scientific brackishwater 
aquaculture started around 1980s, wherein shrimp were cultured in well designed and 
managed ponds as there was high demand for them in the export market. At present 
around 0.16 million ha are under shrimp culture. Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal States 
are the chief producers of shrimp accounting for about 80% of the total country’s 
production. However, of late, culture of high-value euryhaline marine fish species is being 
undertaken in brackishwater ponds and cages to meet the demand in domestic market. The 
most commonly cultured fish are Mullets, Milkfish, Seabass, Pompano, Grouper, etc. 
 
2.1. Mullets 
Thirteen species of Mullets are found in India of which eight species contribute to the 
commercial catches.  Mugil cephalus and M. parsia are the two cultivable species. They are 
euryhaline species that tolerate salinity from 0-35 ppt. They are omnivorous in feeding 
habit. They feed at the lowest trophic levels on plant detritus and algae. Mullets are known 
for the high protein and vitamins contained in the muscle tissue. The Roe (ripe ovaries) from 
mature females are a delicacy, high-valued and sought after in many countries.  
 
 
 
 
Fish Name Picture 
Grey Mullet 
Mugil cephalus 
 
Goldspot Mullet 
Mugil parsia 
 
 
 
2.2. Milkfish 
The Milkfish, Chanos chanos, is the sole living representative of the family Chanidae and is 
widely distributed in the whole of tropical and subtropical regions of the Indian and the 
Pacific Oceans. The distribution coincides with coral reef areas where the water is warm, 
clear and shallow. It is one of the most important species cultured in South-East Asia. 
 
Milkfish, Chanos chanos 
2. 3. Bass 
Asian Seabass, Lates calcarifer, commonly called the Giant Sea Perch is an economically 
important food fish in the tropical and subtropical regions of Asia and the Pacific. Because of 
its relatively high market value, it has become an attractive commodity of both large and 
small-scale aquaculture enterprises. The major constraint to rapid expansion of Seabass 
culture has been the inconsistent supply of fry collected from the wild. The Crescent Bass or 
Tiger Bass, Terapon jarbua, is common species in the Indo-Pacific; it occasionally makes its 
way into the aquarium trade. 
 
 
Fish Name Picture 
Asian Seabass 
Lates calcarifer 
 
Tiger Bass 
Terapon jarbua 
 
 
2.4. Pearlspot 
The Green Chromide Pearlspot, Etroplus suratensis, is the state fish of Kerala and locally (in 
Malayalam) it is called “Karimeen”. It being an euryhaline species is compatible for 
polyculture with other brackishwater / freshwater fish. It breeds naturally in confined 
conditions, sexes are separate and fertilization is external. 
 
 
Pearlspot, Etroplus suratensis 
2. 5. Grouper 
There are more than 64 species of groupers found in the Indian waters. Groupers are 
important and economically valuable aquaculture species in Southeast Asian countries. 
Though groupers are sea fish, juveniles of some groupers are found in coastal waters, 
mangroves, estuaries and sandy bottoms. Groupers are ideal candidate species for intensive 
aquaculture particularly in the Asia-Pacific Region because of high consumer demand, 
desirable taste, hardiness in a crowded environment, efficient feed conversion, and rapid 
growth. Commonly found species in Indian waters are Greasy Grouper (Epinephelus 
tauvina), Orange-spotted Grouper (E. coioides), Brown-lined Reef Cod (E. undulosus) and 
Brown-spotted Reef Cod (E. chlorostigma). 
 
Fish Name Picture 
Greasy Grouper 
Epinephelus tauvina 
 
Orange-spotted Grouper 
Epinephelus coioides 
 
Brown-lined Reef Cod 
Epinephelus undulosus 
 
 
2.6. Scat 
Spotted Scat, Scatophagus argus, is a euryhaline subtropical fish widely distributed in 
Indian-Pacific waters. It occurs in two basic colour morphs which are called Green Scat and 
Ruby or Red Scat and lives in coastal muddy areas, including estuaries, mangroves, 
harbours, and the lower courses of rivers. It is an important aquaculture food fish with high 
economic value and is also a popular aquarium species due to its colourful appearance, 
hardiness, slow growth, and calm behaviour. 
 
Spotted Scat, Scatophagus argus 
 
2. 7. Catfish 
Nuna Tengara or the Long Whiskers Catfish, Mystus gulio, is a common and popular fish 
because of its nutritional value and taste. Primarily a brackish water fish that enters and 
lives in freshwater. In freshwater, adults occur mainly in larger water bodies (rivers and 
streams) with mud or clay substratum, and rarely found in smaller streams. It forms schools 
of 10 to 25 individuals. Mystus vittatus, the Striped Dwarf Catfish is found in brackishwater 
systems with marginal vegetation in lakes and swamps with a mud substratum. 
 
Fish Name Picture 
Long Whiskers Catfish 
Mystus gulio 
 
Striped Dwarf Catfish 
Mystus vittatus 
 
 
2. 8. Pompano 
The Silver Pompano, Trachinotus blochii belongs to the family Carangidae; it resembles the 
much sought after Silver Pomfret (Pampus argenteus). It is a tropical species, distributed in 
the Indo-Pacific Region, inhabits shallow coastal waters.   It is one of the most promising 
species for coastal aquaculture as its growth rate is high, meat quality is good and fetches 
high price in the market.  
 
Silver Pompano, Trachinotus blochii 
 
3. Marine Fisheries 
 
India has a 8,118 km long coastline stretching along 9 Maritime States and 4 Union 
Territories. The nine Maritime States are Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, West Bengal, 
Maharashtra, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Goa. The 4 Maritime Union Territories 
are Daman & Diu, Puducherry, Lakshadweep Islands and the Andaman & Nicobar Islands.  
The country has also a 0.53 million km2 Continental Shelf and 2.02 million km2 of Exclusive 
Economic Zone (EEZ). The annual potential yield from the EEZ is estimated as 3.93 million 
tonnes of fish. The Marine Fisheries has been playing a pivotal role in the Indian Fisheries 
Sector. The major marine catches comes from the coast of Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, 
West Bengal and Maharashtra. 
 
Marine Fisheries Resources of India 
Length of Coastline (km) 8,118 
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) (sq. km) 2,020,000 
Continental Shelf (sq. km) 530,000 
Territorial Sea (up to 12 nautical miles) sq.km 193,834 
Number of Fish Landing Centres 1,537 
Number of Fishing Villages 3,432 
Number of Fishermen Families 874,749 
Fisher-folk Population 4,056,213 
 
The important Marine Fisheries can be grouped into the following categories: 
1. Surface-water Fish (Pelagic): Sardines, Anchovies, Ribbonfish, Mackerel,  
Seerfish, Tuna, etc. 
2. Mid-water Fish (Pelagic): Bombay Duck, Cobia, Silver Bellies, Horse Mackerel, etc. 
3. Bottom-water Fish (Demersal): Perches, Catfish, Pomfrets, Flatfish, Eels, etc. 
 
3.1. Sardines 
Sardines are one of the two most important commercial pelagic schooling fishes in India 
(the other being Mackerel). Fourteen species of Sardines are found in the Indian waters. Out 
of the 14 species, the Oil Sardine Sardinella longiceps alone contributes to the largest single
species fishery in the country, comprising about 15% of the total marine fish catches. The 
Indian Oil Sardine is one of the most regionally limited species of Sardinella and can be 
found in the northern regions of the Indian Ocean. Oil Sardine landing is maximum during 
post-monsoon season followed by monsoon and pre-monsoon.  
 
The other 13 species are termed as “Lesser Sardines”, comprise all the species of Sardines 
(Sardinella spp.) other than the Indian Oil Sardine, and contribute about 3-7% to the total 
marine fish catch. They are known to inhabit mostly the near-shore waters up to 25-30 m 
depth zone. Nine species of Lesser Sardines occurring in Indian waters, in the order of 
abundance, are Sardinella gibbosa, S. fimbriata, S. sirm, S. albella, S. dayi, S. sindensis, S. 
clupeoides, S.melanura and S. jonesi. Four regions of Lesser Sardine concentrations are 
noticed along the Indian coasts, viz., Goa, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Pondicherry, 
Andhra Pradesh and Orissa. 
 
Sardines 
Fish Name Picture 
Indian Oil Sardine 
Sardinella longiceps 
 
Goldstripe Sardine 
Sardinella gibbosa 
 
Fringescale Sardine 
Sardinella fimbriata 
 
 
3. 2. Anchovies 
Anchovies are small fish having greenish-blue reflections due to a silver-coloured 
longitudinal stripe that runs from the head to base of caudal (tail) fin. They are found in 
scattered areas throughout the world's oceans, but are concentrated in temperate waters, 
and are rare or absent in very cold or very warm seas. Anchovies contributes around 6% to 
the total pelagic fish landings of India. 28 species of Anchovies are recorded in the Indian 
waters. Anchovies mostly feed on zooplankton. Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu along east 
coast and Kerala along west coast are the three coastal states of India which support 95% of 
the average annual catch of anchovies in the country. There are two fishing seasons: 
January to May and September to November, the latter period being the peak season for 
anchovy catches. Major contribution to the fishery is by the genera: Stolephorus, Engraulis, 
Thryssa, Setipinna and Coilia.  
 
Anchovies  
Fish Name Picture 
Indian Anchovy 
Stolephorus indicus 
 
Goldspotted Grenadier Anchovy  
Coilia dussumieri 
 
Malbar Anchovy 
Thryssa malabarica 
 
 
 
3. 3. Mackerels 
Mackerel is a common name applied to a number of different species of schooling 
epipelagic fish of the family Scombridae. They are found in both temperate and tropical 
seas, mostly living along the coast or offshore in the oceanic environment. Mackerels 
typically have: rows of longitudinal bands or spots along upper half of body, dorsal and anal 
finlets, keels on caudal peduncle and a deeply forked caudal fin. Mackerels found in Indian 
waters are the Indian Mackerel (Rastrelliger kanagurta) and the Indian Chub Mackerel 
(Scomber indicus).  
 
Mackerels 
Fish Name Picture 
Indian Mackerel 
Rastrelliger kanagurta 
 
Indian Chub Mackerel 
Scomber indicus 
 
 
3.4. Seerfishes 
Another group of commercially important fishes, belonging to the family Scombridae, are 
the Seerfishes represented in Indian coastal waters by Narrow-barred Spanish Mackerel 
Scomberomorus commerson and Indo-Pacific King Mackerel Scomberomorus guttatus. 
 
 
Seerfish, Scomberomorus commerson 
3.5. Tunas 
Tunas (family Scombridae) are among the largest, most specialized and commercially 
important of all fishes. They are found in temperate and tropical oceans around the world 
and account for a major proportion of the world fishery production. Tunas are unique 
among fishes because they possess body temperature several degrees higher than the 
ambient waters and have high metabolic rate that enables them to exhibit extraordinary 
growth rate. They have streamlined bodies and vary widely in size, colour and fin length. 
 
Around 19% of the global tuna catches are from the Indian Ocean. The waters of Andaman 
Islands are known to have the world’s richest stocks of Tunas with 100,000 tonnes of 
Coastal Tunas and 82,000 tonnes of Oceanic Tunas available for exploitation. In 
Lakshadweep the stocks of Tunas are estimated to be around 50,000-90,000 tonnes, and 
Tunas contribute around 85% of the total marine fish landings in Lakshadweep Islands.  
Tunas commonly found in Indian waters are Little Tunny (Euthynnus affinis), Frigate Tuna 
(Auxis thazard), Oriental Bonito (Sarda orientalis), Yellowfin Tuna (Thunnus albacares), 
Bigeye Tuna (Thunnus obesus), Skipjack Tuna (Katsuwonus pelamis), etc. 
 
 
Tunas 
Fish Name Picture 
Little Tunny  
Euthynnus affinis 
 
Frigate Tuna 
Auxis thazard 
 
Oriental Bonito 
Sarda orientalis 
 
Yellowfin Tuna  
Thunnus albacares 
 
Bigeye Tuna 
Thunnus obesus 
 
Skipjack Tuna  
Katsuwonus pelamis 
 
 
3. 6. Bombay-duck  
Bombay-duck Harpodon nehereus, found in the mid-water column, distributed in the Indo
West Pacific, is a white, soft and delicate fish, predatory in habit; it contributes to a major 
fishery along the Maharashtra and Gujarat coasts and occurs sporadically along the east 
coast. It is captured using a characteristic bag-net known as ‘dol’ that is operated against 
tidal currents. It is a popular food-fish along the north-west coast of India; it is marketed 
fresh, dried or salted.  
 
Bombay-duck, Harpodon nehereus 
 
3.7. Cobia 
Cobia, Rachycentron canadum, is found throughout the water column and occurs in warm
temperate to tropical waters of the West and East Atlantic, throughout the Caribbean and in 
similar zones in the Indo-West Pacific region of India, Australia and Japan.  The fish is a 
carnivore and congregates at reefs, ship wrecks, harbour-buoys and other submerged 
structures in search of food.  Juveniles may enter estuaries and mangroves in search of prey. 
It is dark brown in colour, young ones have alternate black and white horizontal stripes, it 
grows up to 2 m length and 50 kg weight. It is one of the fast-growing and high-value marine 
fish that is being farmed in Sea Cages, in India.     
 
 
Cobia, Rachycentron canadum 
 
 
3.8. Flatfishes 
Flatfishes (Order Pleuronectiformes) are bottom dwelling deep sea bony fishes with oval
shaped and flattened bodies having both eyes on one side of the body. Flatfish can 
camouflage themselves by imitating the colour of the sea floor. They include Halibut, 
Flounder, Sole, Turbot, Plaice, Dab, etc. Among the marine fishery resources of India, the 
flatfishes occupy a place importance along the West Coast especially the North Kerala and 
South Kannada coasts. Although, about 91 species of flatfish are reported in the Indian 
waters, it is only a very small number that contributes to any large catches and in fact only 
Malabar Tongue Sole (Cynoglossus macrostomus) contributes to a regular fishery of 
significance. Others species such as Large Scale Tongue Sole (C. macrolepidotus), Indian 
Halibut (Psettodes erumei), Large Tooth Founder (Pseudorhombus arsius), etc., are also 
found in small quantities.  
Flatfish 
Fish Name Picture 
Malabar Tongue Sole 
Cynoglossus macrostomus 
 
Large Scale Tongue Sole 
Cynoglossus macrolepidotus 
 
Indian Halibut 
Psettodes erumei 
 
Large Tooth Founder 
Pseudorhombus arsius 
 
 
III. Shellfish Fisheries 
 
Shellfish are aquatic invertebrates having an exoskeleton/shell. They can be grouped into 
two general categories: Crustaceans and Molluscs. Crustaceans refers to those organisms 
that have segmented bodies covered with armour-like sections of thick or thin shell and 
bear jointed appendages: e.g., crabs, shrimps, lobsters and crayfish. Molluscs are of three 
types: (i) Bivalves that include clams, oysters, mussels and scallops; (ii) Univalves that 
include abalone, periwinkle and other snails like conch and whelk; and (iii) Cephalopods that 
have a soft pliable body with an internal shell, a beaked head bearing tentacles, include 
squids and octopus. 
 
Types of Shellfish  
• Crustaceans: Prawns, Shrimps, Crabs, Lobsters, Crayfishes, etc. 
• Molluscs: Gastropods (snails), Pelecypods or Bivalves (clams, mussels, oysters) and 
Cephalopods (squids, cuttlefish, octopus). 
 
1. Crustaceans 
 
Crustaceans are a large and diverse group of Arthropods (bearing jointed appendages) that 
thrive in a wide range of habitats; majority are marine while relatively few inhabit inland 
waters. More than 117 species of shrimps, 17 species of lobsters and around 700 species of 
crabs are found to inhabit mostly marine and estuarine areas in the country, of which 
around 150 species contribute to commercial catches. Around 80% of the Crustacean 
landings are from the West Coast while only about 20% are from the East Coast. 
Maharashtra followed by Gujarat top in Crustacean fisheries production.  India is one of the 
major contributors to the global marine Crustacean production. 
 
 
1.1. Shrimps and Prawns 
 
Shrimps and Prawns belong to the Order Decapoda (having 10 pairs of legs: 5 pairs of walking 
legs and 5 pairs of swimming legs). Generally the smaller forms are termed Shrimp while the 
larger ones are known as Prawns.  In seafood trade, the marine forms are referred to as 
Shrimp (Family Penaeidae) while the freshwater forms are referred to as Prawns (Family 
Palaemonidae). However, quite often, these two terms are used interchangeably.  
 a. Freshwater Prawns: 
 
The Giant Freshwater Prawn, Macrobrachium rosenbergii, popularly known as SCAMPI, is 
the most important species. It is native to the Indo-West Pacific region, from India through 
Southeast Asia to Northern Australia. It has been introduced to several countries across the 
globe for aquaculture purpose. Males and females have different growth rates; the males 
exhibit heterogenous individual growth. Among males there are three different 
morphotypes (Small Males, Orange Claws and Blue Claws) which display social hierarchy. All 
three types of males are sexually active, and females that have undergone premating moult 
will pair with any type male to reproduce. A Blue Claw male protects the female until their 
shells have hardened but the other two show no such behaviour.  
 
The second largest freshwater palaemonid prawn, Macrobrachium malcolmsonii, also called 
the Indian River Prawn/Monsoon River Prawn/Godavari Prawn, has great potential for 
aquaculture development in the inland waters of the country.  Freshwater prawn farming in 
India developed during 1999, after marine shrimp culture encountered disease problems. 
 
Freshwater Prawns 
Name Picture 
Giant Freshwater Prawn (SCAMPI)  
Macrobrachium rosenbergii 
 
Indian River Prawn 
Macrobrachium malcolmsonii 
 
 
b. Marine Shrimp: 
Some of the commercially important marine shrimps are Tiger Prawn (Penaeus monodon), 
Indian White Prawn (Penaeus indicus), Pink Shrimp (Metapenaeus dobsoni), Brown Shrimp 
(Metapenaeus monoceros), etc. For Aquaculture purpose, the exotic Pacific White Shrimp 
(Litopenaeus vannamei) has been introduced into India and is being farmed extensively on a 
commercial-scale in low-saline or brackishwater ponds in Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil 
Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, West Bengal etc. With the availability of Specific Pathogen 
Free (SPF) quality brooders and seed and adoption of improved culture techniques, 
mortality of juvenile and young shrimp due to disease reduced and thereby yields of shrimp 
increased significantly in the country. 
 
Marine Prawns/ Shrimps 
Name Picture 
Tiger Prawn/ Black Tiger Shrimp  
Penaeus monodon 
 
Indian White Prawn/Shrimp  
Penaeus indicus 
 
Pacific White Shrimp  
Litopenaeus vannamei 
 
 
 
1.2. Crabs 
Crabs are decapods in which the abdomen is vestigial; the five pairs of thoracic legs are well 
developed and used for capturing prey, walking and swimming.  Crabs inhabit a wide variety 
of habitats like mud flats, rock crevices, under stones, in gravel and sand and constructed 
burrows etc.  They  are  primarily nocturnal  and  prefer  hiding  places  for shelter  during  
the  day  time. 
 
a. Freshwater Crabs: 
Freshwater crabs  are adapted  to  semi-terrestrial  or  terrestrial  mode  of  life  and known  
for  their  ability  to  complete  the life-cycle independent  of  marine  environment. They are  
generally  omnivorous,  feeding  on plant  material, live  or  dead  animals such  as  fish,  
prawns,  molluscs,  etc., and sometimes cannibalism  is  also  seen.   Over  1300  species  are  
known  from  the world,  of  which  96  species  are found in  India. Some of the commonly 
found freshwater crabs of India are listed below:  
 
Freshwater Crabs 
Name Picture 
Indian Freshwater Crab 
Barytelphusa cunicularis 
 
Maydelliathelphusa lugubris 
 
Maydelliathelphusa falcidigitis 
 
 
 
b. Brackishwater/Marine Crab: 
Marine crabs are one of the valuable seafood items that are in great demand both in the 
domestic and export markets. There are about 600 species of marine crabs recorded from 
Indian waters. The crab fishery in India is dominated by a few species such as Scylla serrata, 
S. tranquebarica, Portunus pelagicus, P. sanguinolentus, Charybdis feriata, C. lucifera and C. 
truncata.  Commercial-scale crab culture is undertaken along the coastal areas of Andhra 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Karnataka. Grow-out culture (‘Crab Fattening’) is generally 
pond based wherein crabs juveniles are held in pens or cages. Production of ‘Soft-Shelled 
Crabs’ is done using floating boxes held in tidal ponds.  
Marine Crabs 
Name Picture 
Mud Crab 
Scylla serrata 
 
Three-spot Swimming Crab 
 Portunus sanguinolentus 
 
Blue Swimming Crab 
 Portunus pelagicus 
 
 
 
1.3. Lobsters 
 
Lobsters are one of the most valuable and highly priced crustaceans as well as an important 
export commodity. The massive head bears five pairs of walking legs; the abdomen is well 
developed, muscular and bears five pairs of swimmerets. Lobsters are solitary animals that 
crawl on the sea floor and hide under rocks. Among the 12 species recorded from Indian 
coastal waters, only four species of Spiny Lobsters (Panulirus homarus, P. ornatus, P. 
polyphagus, P. versicolor) and one species of Slipper Lobster (Thenus orinetalis) are 
commercially important. Growth is slow, most lobsters take more than 3 years to attain 
maturation and they have a prolonged life-cycle. Grow-out and fattening of lobsters is 
commonly done in indoor tanks and cages to fetch better price in market.   
 
 
 
Lobsters 
Name Picture 
Scalloped Spiny Lobster 
Panulirus homarus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ornate Spiny Lobster 
Panulirus ornatus 
 
Slipper Lobster 
Thenus orientalis 
 
 
 
2. Molluscs 
Molluscs are invertebrates, belonging to one of the largest phylum, inhabiting the marine, 
freshwater and terrestrial ecosystems. Their body structure, form, colour and size vary 
widely. In India, molluscs are captured for food, pharmaceuticals and ornamental purpose 
and dead shells are collected for making shell-lime. Molluscs include forms such as bivalves, 
univalves and cephalopods, and some of them support both capture and culture fisheries. 
 
2.1. Bivalves 
Bivalves as the name suggest are bilaterally symmetrical, laterally compressed molluscs, 
with extensive mantle lobes, which secrete the shell having two valves. Majority of bivalves 
are marine and a few species are found in freshwater habitats. Nearly 652 species of marine 
bivalves are reported from India, of which 88 species are endemic to Indian waters. Clams 
are the most important group among bivalves forming 85.8%, followed by Mussels 9.6% and 
Oysters 4.6%.  
a. Clams: 
Commercially exploited Clams are the Villorita cyprinoides, Paphia malabarica, Meretrix 
casta, Sunetta scripa, Anadara granosa, Anadara rhombia, Meretrix meretrix, Marcia opima, 
Giloina bengalensis, Gafrarium diverticulum and G. lumidum. Nearly 93.3% of the 
contribution to the average annual clam production is by three species, namely Villorita 
cyprinoides, Paphia malabarica and Meretrix casta. 
 
Name Picture 
Blood Calm 
Anadara granosa 
 
Asiatic Hard Clam 
Meretrix meritrix 
 
Black Clam 
Villorita cyprinoides 
 
Short-neck Clam 
Paphia malabarica 
 
Backwater Clam 
Meretrix casta 
 
 
 
 
b. Mussels: 
Commercial fishery of Mussels along the Indian coast is mainly for the Green Mussel Perna viridis, 
contributing 83.7% on an average, and the remaining by the Brown Mussel Perna indica which is 
limited to the fishery along southern tip of Indian peninsula. 
Name Picture 
Green Mussel 
Perna viridis 
 
Brown Mussel 
Perna indica 
 
 
c. Oyster: 
The Indian Backwater Oyster Crassostrea madrasensis is the most important edible oyster exploited 
(90.1%), followed by the Rock Oyster Saccostrea cucullata (5.9%) and Windowpane Oyster Placuna 
placuna (3.6%) along the Indian Coast. The Pearl Oyster Pinctata fucata, which produces 
Natural Pearls in the sea, is utilized for production of Cultured Pearls.  
 
Name Picture 
Indian Backwater Oyster 
Crassostrea madrasensis 
 
Rock Oyster 
Saccostrea cucullata 
 
Pearl Oyster 
Pinctata fucata 
 
Windowpane Oyster 
Placuna placuna 
 
 
2.2. Gastropods/ Snails/ Slugs 
Gastropods are the largest group of Phylum Mollusca that inhabit marine, freshwater and 
terrestrial environments.  The marine gastropods are an important fauna of Rocky Shores. 
Some of the common genera include: Turritella, Natica, Bursa, Tonna, Murex, Babylonia, 
Oliva, Conus, Umbonium, Cellana, Turbinella pyrum (Sacred Chank), etc.    
 
Sacred Chank, Turbinella pyrum 
 
2.3. Cephalopods 
Cephalopods are a small group of highly advanced and organized molluscans, exclusively 
marine animals. The best-known feature of the Cephalopods is the possession of arms and 
tentacles, eight or ten in most forms, surrounding the head. The Octopus, Squid, Cuttlefish, 
and Nautilus are the familiar representatives. Cephalopods occur in large numbers and form 
a major food resource of the seas and oceans. India’s squid fishing fleet accounted for 3% of 
the global squid production and makes up approximately 5–7% of U.S. squid imports.  
 
a. Squids: 
 
Squids are economically important Cephalopods represented in India mainly by Loligo 
duvauceli, Sepioteuthis lessoniana and Doryteuthis species. The Indian squid Loligo duvauceli 
is the dominant species, contributing about 97% of the total Squid catches annually in the 
country. 
 
Name Picture 
Indian Squid 
Loligo duvauceli 
 
 
b. Cuttlefish: 
 
Cuttlefish especially Needle Cuttlefish, Sepia aculeata, is one of the commercially important 
marine fishery resources of Indian waters by virtue of its export demand, and is optimally 
exploited from East Coast and under-exploited from West Coast. Needle Cuttlefish is a 
bottom-living species that occurs down to 60 m depth. 
 
Name Picture 
Needle Cuttlefish 
Sepia aculeata 
 
Pharaoh Cuttlefish  
Sepia pharaonis 
 
 
 
c. Octopus: 
 
As many as 200 species of Octopodidae are known to occur in the world Oceans of which 
about 60 are reported from the Indian Ocean. Catches of octopus in Indian waters mostly 
occurs along the coast of Lakshadweep, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra. Thirty eight 
commercially important species of Octopus have been reported from the Indian seas. 
Cistopus indicus which is called the Old-Woman Octopus is the most commonly occurring 
species.  
Name Picture 
Old-Woman Octopus 
Cistopus indicus 
 
 
 
IV. Fish and Health Benefits 
 
Fisheries and Aquaculture have been considered as an important means of poverty 
elevation and food security besides promoting health and well being. Fish continue to be 
one of the most traded food commodities worldwide. It contributes to around 17% of the 
global population’s animal protein intake. Around 125-210 million tonnes of fish is projected 
to be required by 2050 to meet the annual per capita requirement of 15-20 kg.  
 
Fish is often referred to as “Rich Food for Poor People” as it provides essential nourishment 
with both macronutrients and micronutrients. Fish contain low-fat high quality protein with 
omega-3 fatty acids and vitamins. Fish is rich in calcium and phosphorus and a great source 
of minerals, such as iron, zinc, iodine, magnesium, and potassium. On a fresh-weight basis, 
fish contains a good quantity of protein, about 18-20%, and all the eight essential amino 
acids including the sulphur-containing lysine, methionine, and cysteine. In general, fish have 
less fat than red meats and the fat content ranges from 0.2% to 25%. However, fats from 
fatty fish species contain the polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) namely EPA 
(eicosapentaenoic acid) and DHA (docosahexaenoic acid) which are essential for proper 
growth of children, proper brain development in unborn babies, reduced risk of preterm 
delivery and low birth weight. The fat also contributes to energy supplies and assists in the 
proper absorption of fat soluble vitamins namely A, D, E, and K. Fish is a rich source of 
vitamins, particularly vitamins A and D from fatty species, as well as thiamine, riboflavin and 
niacin (vitamins B1
 , B2 
and B3
 ). Vitamin D present in fish liver and oils is crucial for bone 
growth since it is essential for the absorption and metabolism of calcium.  
 
Fish is also called “Brain Food” as it helps in development and function of brain, and “Heart 
Food” as it contributes to lower risks of heart attacks and strokes. Consumption of fish 
reduces risk of autoimmune diseases, including Type-1 Diabetes, prevents and treats 
depression, protect from age-related brain deterioration, help prevent asthma in children, 
protect vision in old age by lowering risk of muscular degeneration, improves sleep quality, 
lowers risk of cancer, blood pressure, Alzheimer’s disease etc. Fish is soft, easy to cook and 
more easily digested than meat so even young children can be fed fish, contributing to 
improved nutrient intake.
